Hey.
Howdy, howdy, and welcome back in this lesson, we're going to talk about constructors.
What are those?
So for this conversation, we're going to continue with our person class that we created in the last
video.
I did a number of things in that video that I did not explain.
And so now we're going to come back and actually try to understand a few parts of it.
Well, I'll break this up into a few different videos, though.
So constructors, what are constructors?
Well, in our person class, we created this class called person and we modeled some of the properties
of the person, the first name, last name and date of birth.
Then we created a couple of things that look like methods here.
We created this one on Line 10, but it doesn't really have anything in it.
It's basically looking like an empty method, essentially.
And then we have another one starting on from lines 13 through 17, and it does have a little bit inside
of it.
These two methods looking things are constructors.
They basically are methods, but they're very, very special methods.
They have a few interesting characteristics.
First of all, they don't return anything.
There's no return type.
Real methods have a return type, always.
And even if, well, even if a method doesn't return anything, it still has to declare a return type
of void.
That tells the compiler the Java system that this method won't return anything.
But constructors are a little different, even though they basically are methods.
They do not declare a return type and they don't return anything.
The purpose of a constructor is essentially to allow us to initialize any properties as the object is
getting created.
So we'll go back to our conversation about classes and objects.
Objects are built from classes.
A class is a blueprint for how to build an object.
OK.
We can build objects by taking a class and then telling the system to build build an object from that
class.
We have an opportunity, or at least we can have an opportunity to initialize certain properties of
an object as it's being created.
Why might we want to do this?
Well, typically when we are modeling concepts in a class such as a person, there may be properties
of that class or of that concept such that it basically wouldn't even make sense for that, for that
object to exist without certain properties being set on it.
Let me give you an example or two in general.
In the real world, there's usually no such thing as a person who doesn't have a name, right?
For all intents and purposes, you know, maybe when the rock finger prints changed his name to a symbol
for a short time, nobody knew what to call him anymore.
So people started calling him the artist, formerly known as Prince.
Even then, though, that became essentially his name, right?
And the symbol arguably was his stage name.
So for all intents and purposes, there's probably no such thing as a person with no name, at least
not a person who interacts with other people.
So in a program that is modeling a person, it may not make sense to allow a person object to be created
without having a name.
If that is the case, we may want to almost force that rule into our code.
That would mean that at the time that we are creating the object or having Java create the object,
we must supply a name for the object that is about to be created.
OK.
Similarly, if we were modeling cars, it may not be permissible to create an object that represents
a car without specifying a make and a model, perhaps even a year.
Perhaps you don't have a valid car if you don't have those things.
OK, so constructors are what would allow us to to ensure that these properties are being set.
So here in this program, we have two types of constructors.
We have a a what's called a no ARG default constructor, no ARG.
I use this term in the Hello World Program ARG.
I said it means argument.
What that basically means is.
Data that we can pass to a method or, in this case, a constructor, OK?
Data or information that we can pass in arguments.
So we have a no ARG constructor because this constructor here doesn't take any inputs at all.
These parentheses here with nothing in them, tells us that there are no inputs needed or even accepted.
Then we have another constructor, though that does take three arguments a first name or last name and
a date of birth.
And this is saying that when you create a person, you can, if you want, pass in a first name, last
name and date of birth.
So we have two ways of creating a person here, we could just create a person and not pass anything
in or we could create a person and pass in the first name, last name and date of birth.
Technically speaking, if I were writing a proper business application and I knew that I had a business
rule that a person cannot validly exist without a name and date of birth, I would likely make this
no our default constructor private so that no one could even bother calling it.
But I'm just saying, if I were doing this for real, these I might not allow this know our default
constructor to ever be used by any code outside of this class.
OK.
And thereby, I force people and myself to always construct a person object using this three argument
constructor.
Now what I'm actually doing in this constructor is I'm allowing these three values to be passed in to
the constructor method, if you will.
And then I'm taking those values which are here like this value here?
Is this value here.
This last name corresponds to to the right hand side of this equals sign.
And then this state of birth corresponds to the right hand side of this equal sign.
And what I'm doing is I'm allowing the code that is constructing this person to pass in these values
so that they can be set internally on this new object, which is here the word.
This here refers to the new person object that is being created.
So imagine if a new person is coming into the Java world for the first time and the the creator of this
new person has decided that they want this new person to be called Johnny Smith.
With December 1st, 2000 as their date of birth, the creator of Johnny Smith can pass in the first
name and last name and date of birth that they want Johnny Smith to have.
And then, as Johnny Smith actually becomes created, Johnny Smith will have those values set on him
in these fields here.
OK, so that's why we're saying this.
That first name, which refers to this field here, will be set to whatever we passed in.
Let me show you what that looks like in actual use.
OK, if we go back over to our Hello World program, I'm going to create a new line here, and I'm actually
going to create an instance of a person when I say create an instance, what I mean is to create one
actual object of the type called person, an instance of a person class, which is an object.
OK.
So I will create a person.
And I will name this person, Johnny.
Well, I'm going to refer to this person has done there, haven't actually created the person or named
the person yet to create the person.
I need to use the Java keyword new, which tells the Java system, Hey, I want to create a new object,
then I need to tell Java what type of object I want to create based on what types of classes I have.
I have a class called person, someone to say I want to create a person, and now I use the constructors
that exist on person.
And in this case, I'm going to use the constructor that takes three arguments and it's going to ask
me, OK, well, OK, looks like you want to use the constructor that takes three arguments that takes
a first name, last name and date of birth so I can use quotes because this is a string that's text.
Text goes inside of quotes, Johnny, then a comma.
Each argument will be separated by commas and then a last name.
So Smith.
And then a local date.
And here I'm going to give myself a little more room here.
Local date of.
And I am actually replacing the idea that was originally at this point in the video because I said something
wrong about the month and how that is encoded.
We're just encoding the month very straightforwardly.
So the month is November.
I may have said December earlier, but it is actually going to be November in this video and that is
11.
And then we'll use a day of day of the month of one.
OK.
And so what this line of code is actually saying is it's telling the Java system to create a new instance
of the class person.
And initialize this class, or I'm sorry, this object with a first name of Johnny, a last name of
Smith and a date of birth.
Oops.
I have 200 there, I should say 2000 of the year, 2000 November 1st, and then store a reference to
this object of Johnny Smith inside of a variable called Johnny.
So that's an example of me using the three argument constructor.
Now I have two constructors on the person class, so let me show you how the other constructor can be
used.
I'll create another person, Amy, and I'll tell the Java system, give me a new instance of a person,
but loops of a person.
But this time I'm not going to pass anything in and that's perfectly valid.
Valid.
I'm not getting any errors at all.
However, this person, Amy, has no values set at all.
It's it's like a blank slate.
It did create a person, but as of right now, if I were to run this program at Line 10, this person
won't have a first name or a last name or a date of birth.
So it's almost effectively an invalid person because that's what I'm permitting to to happen here.
Now, there could be reasons in a program why I might want to allow a person to exist and be created
a person object or instance to exist and be created without specifying a name or date of birth.
But in many cases, in business programming in particular, that might not be a great idea, and you
may want to programmatically enforce that.
Such a concept has to have a certain bare minimum amount of properties set on it.
And I'll show you, as I said earlier, what I might do in real life is to disallow myself and others
from even being able to create this kind of probably invalid object.
And the way I can do that, I can jump back over into the person class.
I'm going to jump over to that class directly from here by holding down on the command button on Mac
and then clicking which let's see, you can do a control, be in Windows and Linux.
Okay, so I'm back here.
So if I make this no ARG constructor private by just putting the word private here.
Now notice it tells me you've got one related problem.
And if I click on this, yeah.
So the problem that I have is that the ADC, which is very smart, that's why it's called intelligent.
The IDC knows that I've got a line of code where I'm using that no ARG default constructor and it's
telling me, Hey man, if you make that private, this code over here in the Hello world class online
10 will no longer be able to create that person in this way, because that is your know our default
constructor and he's not code in the Hello.
World class is not allowed to call private code in the person class because it's private.
OK.
And so this is no longer a valid thing that I can do.
But if I was over here making this private, that means I don't want people to be able to new up.
That's another expression you'll hear.
So you can hear us say, create a new object, instantiate an object, or sometimes you'll hear Java
developers say new up.
I don't want to permit myself or anyone else to new up a person without passing in the first name,
last name and date of birth.
So I'm actually protecting myself from people doing things or myself doing things that are invalid.
OK.
I just made this method.
I'm going to jump back over to that method again.
I just made this method private so that no one outside of this class, no code outside of this class
is permitted to call this method.
Now, I guess I've already explained why I would want to do that.
You might be wondering, Well, why do you even have this method here at all if you're not going to
let anyone use it?
And that is a good question.
So let me jump back over here to I'm going to go ahead and delete this, this in about this now invalid
line.
OK, and then I'm going to jump back over to the person class.
Now I'm going to just delete that constructor entirely.
OK, so.
After having deleted our know our default constructor and running the program as it runs just fine,
there are no errors here.
Now let's try something else, though let's comment out Line nine.
And to do that, I'm going to hold down on command and forward slash or on Windows and Linux control
and forward slash someone to comment that out.
And I'm going to create another person, a different person.
I'm going to create Amy again.
But with the no, our default constructor person, Amy, new person.
Now I'm getting an error if you can see that there.
Let's see.
Basically, it's telling me there is no no ARG default constructor anymore.
I can't do this, which makes sense, right?
I deleted the new ARG default constructor.
If I go back over here to this class, I'm going to do something now.
I'm going to comment out the three ARG constructor, which we currently are not using command, forward
slash or control forward slash.
Then I'm going to go back, look at what just happened when I commented out the three ARG constructor
and then I went back over to the Hello World Program Line 10 suddenly does not have any problem anymore.
It's it's valid now.
Now that's kind of weird, isn't it?
What just happened by me getting rid of the three ARG constructor?
So at the moment, I haven't written any constructors, right?
I don't have any constructors anymore, or at least I don't have any that I've written.
Suddenly, my no arg default constructor use online tend to create a person is valid, and I'll prove
that I'll run this and it will not blow up.
Yeah.
Works just fine.
Why is that?
Let's go back over to the person class and see.
OK, so I now have no no constructor written here, yet I'm using a no ARG default constructor here
on Line 10 in the Hello world class and it's working.
It's fine.
Why is that?
Well, that's an interesting characteristic of constructors in Java.
If you create a Java class and you do not write any constructor at all.
Java will give you a free no ARG default constructor right out of the box.
You don't have to do anything.
It'll give you that for free.
OK.
And that's what I'm using here.
However, however, please write this down.
Remember this as soon as you create your own constructor, that is not a no arg default constructor.
So in other words, as soon as you create a constructor that takes any arguments at all.
If that is the only constructor you create, Java will no longer create a free no ARG default constructor
for you.
So as soon as I.
Uncomment my three argument constructor here.
And go back to Hello, World, suddenly, this is no longer valid because Java will no longer create
a no argh default constructor for me.
So this default no ARG constructor that Java creates for me is a convenience.
OK.
It's this trying to prevent me from having to do a little too much boilerplate coding, but it only
goes so far.
OK.
So please keep that in mind.
That's an easy thing to forget about, and it will trip you up.
There are a whole lot of what are called frameworks in Java that are very commonly used, but these
are frameworks that assume that there is a no ARG default constructor on your classes.
And oftentimes you will write your own constructors that are not no args that they take arguments and
you'll forget that if you do that, you may need to manually write your own no ARG default constructor.
So if you want to have something like this work where you can use the person class in this way and you
can also use it in this way, if you wanted to do that, to be able to do that, you would need to go
ahead and implement the No ARG constructor.
And by the way, the ADC probably can do that for us.
Yeah, create constructor.
Look at that.
So I hear I'm going to do that again.
Just so you can really see what I did there, so I hovered over the little red squiggly lines there
and it told me what it doesn't like, and then it offered, Hey, do you want the idea off or do you
want me to to create the constructor for you?
And I clicked on that and bam, it created that.
No, our default constructor for me.
OK, so I didn't even have to write it.
I don't like all this empty space, by the way, so I'm going to get rid of some of that.
And normally I prefer my simplest constructor in this case, the no, our default constructor.
I usually prefer that to be up near the top.
It's just kind of a convention.
Yeah.
All right.
So, OK, I'll add one more thing.
You're not going to need this right now, but we will likely see this a little later.
As I mentioned a few moments ago, there can be frameworks that you may want to use, and those frameworks
expect a no ARG default constructor to exist on your class.
However, you as a business programmer, for example, may not want anyone to be able to utilize the
No ARG default constructor.
How can you reconcile these two things?
You've got a framework that wants to know our default constructor, but you, the programmer and creator
of this class, don't want anyone to be able to create an instance of the class without specifying some
arguments.
How can you have both at the same time?
Well, the key to doing that usually is that you can go ahead and have your know our default constructor
here.
But in order to satisfy the framework, usually it doesn't have to be public.
So you may be able to get away with having it be private or protected.
I again cannot use this line of code here, so I'll just delete that.
But if I had a framework that for some reason was expecting a no ARG default constructor to exist on
this class, it might be happy with this.
It might be satisfied with this.
Either this or else, it may be protected, which is similar.
OK.
I think that wraps it up for constructor's, you now know a lot about constructor's.
I'll see you in the next one.